Add internal solution for cf-1244E (#6135)
cpinitiative/usaco-guide: solutions/silver/cf-1244E.mdx

---
id: cf-1244E
source: CF
title: Minimizing Difference
author: Abhinav Singh
---

[Official Analysis](https://codeforces.com/blog/entry/70553)

## Explanation

> Instead of constructing the final array, fix a target difference $d$ and check if it is achievable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of trying to construct a final array, fix a target difference $d$ and check if it is achievable in under $k$ operations.
```

> If all elements can be moved into some interval $[L, L + d]$, then any larger $d$ also works. Hence, the condition is monotonic and we can binary search on $d$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If all elements can be moved into some interval of length $d$, then it can be shown that all larger values of $d$ work. Hence, the condition is monotonic and we can binary search on $d$.
```

> For a fixed $d$, after sorting, we try to fit all elements into $[L, L + d]$:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a fixed $d$, we try to fit all elements into $[L, L + d]$:
```

- increase elements below $L$

> - decrease elements above $L + d$

Reviewer: From here and on you use this variable $L$, but you never defined it. So either js say in your editorial that 
- you need to move the elements into some interval of length d
- You need to move the lements into some interval [L, L + d], where L is some arbitrary starting point of a interval or smthing.

> The total cost can be computed using prefix sums.

Reviewer: I would be a bit more specific as to what total cost you are referring to here.

The total cost for performing the operations thus the max difference is $d$ can be computed via prefix sums ..

> ### Choosing $L$

Reviewer: This whole section is very overcomplicated IMO.

It suffices to just say something like L or L + d of some interval must belong to the array, and then show why, kinda like the official editorial does.

Let $A$ be the number of elements with $a_i < L$, and $B$ be the number of elements with $a_i > L + d$.

> Shifting $[L, L + d]$ (without crossing any $a_i$) changes the cost by $A - B$.

Reviewer: what you mean by "shifting" is a bit unclear

Specificy if you are shifting L to increase L or something.

Author: we're basically shifting the window L,L+d

Hence, we can move the interval to improve or preserve the cost until an endpoint hits some $a_i$.

If the left endpoint hits $a_i$, then $L = a_i$.
If the right endpoint hits $a_i$, then $L + d = a_i \Rightarrow L = a_i - d$.

Thus, it suffices to consider
$L = a_i \text{ or } L = a_i - d$.

> 

Reviewer: Maybe I missed it or something

Can you add a section that explains now how with all the L positions you now got to consider for some L, you can use prefix sums to calculate the answer for all these and find the min answer for some L / if it is not possible.

Author: writing the math out? sure will do rn

---
id: cf-1244E
source: CF
title: Minimizing Difference
author: Abhinav Singh
---

[Official Analysis](https://codeforces.com/blog/entry/70553)

## Explanation

We want to minimize the difference between the maximum and minimum values after at most `k` operations.

### Binary search on the answer

Instead of directly constructing the final array, fix a target difference `d` and check if it is achievable.

If we can make all elements lie inside some interval of length `d`, then any larger `d` will also work.
So the check is monotonic, and we can binary search on `d`.

### Checking a fixed d

Sort the array.

We want every element inside `[L, L + d]`:
- If `a[i] < L`, increase it to `L`
- If `a[i] > L + d`, decrease it to `L + d`
- Otherwise, leave it

> We compute the total cost using prefix sums.

Reviewer 2: please condense this, since you're just trying to get the point across that given $d$ and a range $[L, L+d]$ it's easy to validate

Author: sure will do

### Choosing L

At first glance, `L` could be any value, which is too large to try directly.

Consider an interval `[L, L + d]`. Let:
- `A` = number of elements less than `L`
- `B` = number of elements greater than `L + d`

If we shift the entire interval slightly to the right(without crossing any `a[i]`):
- We increase the cost for the `A` elements on the left
- We decrease the cost for the `B` elements on the right

So the net change in cost is `A - B`.

- If `A < B`, shifting right reduces cost
- If `A > B`, shifting left reduces cost
- If `A = B`, the cost does not change

So unless the interval is already balanced, we can move it in one direction to improve (or not worsen) the cost.

This means we can keep shifting the interval until one of its endpoints lands on some `a[i]`.

Therefore, it is enough to check:
- `L = a[i]`
- `L = a[i] - d`

> for all `i`.

Reviewer 2: this part should be condensed, cuz you could prob just say like

> Thus, the net change of cost in shifting the interval is $|A - B|$, assuming the interval's endpoints do not fall on any values of $a_i$. Since it is always at least as optimal to move our interval endpoints to values of $a_i$, we can reduce the values of $L$ and $L+d$ to only values of $a_i$.

If we know what $L$ is, we can quickly calculate the number
of operations needed to fit all elements in the range $[L, L + d]$ using prefix sums and binary
search, which we will elaborate more on later.

### Choosing L

Intuition tells us that setting $L$ or $L+d$ to some value of $a_i$ is optimal. This
is true, and we can informally justify this by drawing parallels to the minimizing sums
problem, which is explored in [CPH 6.4](https://usaco.guide/CPH.pdf#page=271). A more
thorough explanation is in the spoiler below.

<Spoiler title="Proof">

The easiest way to show this is by using an exchange argument. Essentially,
we show that any optimal solution can be transformed into the greedy construction
without impacting the quality of the final solution.

Suppose neither $L$ nor $R$ (which is equal to $L+d$) equals any value in $a$. Let $p$ be the number of elements below $L$ and $q$ the number above $R$. Shifting the window right by 1 changes the total cost by $p - q$ (elements below $L$ each need one more step, and elements above $R$ each need one fewer). Shifting left changes the cost by $q - p$ through similar reasoning.

> - If $p \neq q$: shifting in the cheaper direction strictly reduces total cost by $|p - q|$ per step, so the current placement is not optimal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If $p \neq q$: shifting in the cheaper direction (the direction with more elements) strictly reduces total cost by $|p - q|$ per step, so the current placement is not optimal.
```

- If $p = q$: shifting in either direction leaves total cost unchanged, so we can shift freely.

In both cases, we can continue shifting until $L$ or $R$ equals some $a_i$, without ever increasing cost. Therefore, any optimal solution can be transformed into one where a boundary equals some array value.

</Spoiler>

### Calculating the Final Answer

With the knowledge that $L$ or $L+d$ must equal some value of $a_i$, we can
iterate on each $a_i$ and try calculating the cost associated with setting it to
a value of $L$ or $L+d$.

For a range $[L, R]$, where $R=L+d$, the cost of fitting all the elements into range is:

$$
\sum_{a_i < L} (L - a_i) + \sum_{a_i > R} (a_i - R)
$$

In other words, we sum the costs of moving values of $a_i < L$ to equal $L$,
and the costs for moving values of $a_i > R$ to equal $R$.

If we sort our array $a_i$, then a prefix and suffix of values will need to be

> moved within range. We use binary search to find the prefix and suffix of values

Reviewer: correct me if Im wrong, but you wouldn't need binary search to find prefix values, just suffix values.

We use binary search to find the suffix of values that need to be adjusted, and prefix sums to sum up the relevant values of $a_i$.

Reviewer 2: no since a_i can also be equal to $L+d$

Reviewer: oh yeah right mb

---
id: cf-1244E
source: Codeforces
title: Minimizing Difference
author: Abhinav Singh
---

> [Official Editorial](https://codeforces.com/blog/entry/70553)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
---
id: cf-1244E
source: CF
title: Minimizing Difference
author: Abhinav Singh
---

[Official Analysis](https://codeforces.com/blog/entry/70553)
```

also need to link solution metadata (ie go to the module's problems.json and change solution type from external/autogenerated to internal)

Reviewer 2: solution is still unlinked btw

Author: yeah i was kinda busy yesterday, doing rn

## Explanation

We want to minimize the difference between the maximum and minimum values after at most `k` operations.

### Binary search on the answer

Fix a target difference `d` and check:

> Can we make all elements lie inside some interval `[L, L + d]` using at most `k` operations?

This works because the condition is monotonic:
- If it is possible for some `d`, then it is also possible for any larger `d`
- A larger window only makes it easier to fit all elements within `k` operations

> So we can binary search on `d`.

Reviewer 2: this can be condensed, since reader at this point should have some familiarity w/ binary search

Author: hmm fair

### Checking a fixed d

Sort the array.

We want every element inside `[L, L + d]`:
- If `a[i] < L`, increase it to `L`
- If `a[i] > L + d`, decrease it to `L + d`
- Otherwise, leave it

We compute the total cost using prefix sums.

### Choosing L

As we slide `[L, L + d]`, the cost only changes when elements enter or leave the window:
- when some `a[i]` enters from the left → `L = a[i]`
- when some `a[i]` enters from the right → `L = a[i] - d`

Between these points, which elements are inside the window does not change, so the cost is linear (constant slope).

Thus, it is enough to check:
- `L = a[i]`

> - `L = a[i] - d`

Reviewer 2: you should explain why it's safe to pick a value of $a_i$ to either be the start or end of our range, since that part is probably less intuitive than the actual calculating part

Author: the way i understood was that cost was only changing when some a[i] was entering or exiting the window, which i TRIED to explain but idk how to make the explanation simpler tbf

Reviewer 2: > the way i understood was that cost was only changing when some a[i] was entering or exiting the window

not necessarily; consider $a=[1, 1, 5, 10]$ and the target range $[6, 6]$; if we move this range to $[7, 7]$ or some similar case, cost increases

the reasoning is that any solution $[L, L + D]$ that doesn't have an endpoint on a value of $a_i$ would be at least as good (or better) if an endpoint was used, since if there are $A$ elements smaller than $L$ and $B$ elements bigger than $L+D$, we save $|A-B|$ operations by shifting it I think

## Implementation

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(n \log n \log A)$, where $A$ is the initial range of values ($a[n-1] - a[0]$ after sorting).

> **Note:** Use `long long`. The total cost can reach about $10^{14}$.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(N \log N \log A)$, where $A$ is the maximum value of $a_i$.
```

usually dont need to warn about long long unless it's subtle (not really here)

<LanguageSection>

<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;
using ll = long long;

> bool check(ll d, int n, const vector<ll> &a, const vector<ll> &pref, ll k) {

Reviewer 2: maybe use a lambda? would save a lot of the function arguments

Author: sure

	for (int i = 0; i < n; ++i) {
		// Case 1: L = a[i]
		{
			ll L = a[i], R = L + d;
			ll costLeft = (ll)i * L - (i > 0 ? pref[i - 1] : 0LL);
			int r = upper_bound(a.begin(), a.end(), R) - a.begin();
			ll costRight =
			    r < n ? (pref[n - 1] - (r > 0 ? pref[r - 1] : 0LL)) - (ll)(n - r) * R
			          : 0LL;
			if (costLeft + costRight <= k) return true;
		}
		// Case 2: L = a[i] - d
		{
			ll R = a[i], L = R - d;
			int p = lower_bound(a.begin(), a.end(), L) - a.begin();
			ll costLeft = (ll)p * L - (p > 0 ? pref[p - 1] : 0LL);
			ll costRight = (pref[n - 1] - pref[i]) - (ll)(n - i - 1) * R;
			if (costLeft + costRight <= k) return true;
		}
	}
	return false;
}

int main() {
	ios::sync_with_stdio(false);
	cin.tie(nullptr);
	ll n, k;
	cin >> n >> k;
	vector<ll> a(n);
	for (auto &x : a) cin >> x;
	sort(a.begin(), a.end());
	vector<ll> pref(n);
	pref[0] = a[0];
	for (int i = 1; i < n; i++) { pref[i] = pref[i - 1] + a[i]; }
	ll lo = 0, hi = a[n - 1] - a[0];
	while (lo < hi) {
		ll mid = (lo + hi) / 2;
		if (check(mid, n, a, pref, k)) hi = mid;
		else lo = mid + 1;
	}
	cout << lo << "\n";
}
```

</CPPSection>

> </LanguageSection>---

Reviewer 2: this is repeated twice?

Author: oops

Author: done

> Instead of trying to directly construct a final array, we fix the maximum difference $d$ and check if it is achievable in under $k$ operations. If all elements can be moved into some interval of length $d$, then it can be shown that all larger values of $d$ work. Hence, the condition is monotonic and we can binary search on $d$.

Reviewer: Instead of trying to directly construct a final array, we fix the maximum difference $d$ and check if it is achievable in under $k$ operations. If all elements can be moved into some interval of length $d$, then it is clear that all larger values of $d$ will work. Hence, the condition is monotonic and we can binary search on $d$.

For an array to have a maximum difference of $d$, all elements must be in the range $[L, L + d]$, where

> $L$ is an arbitrary starting point. This means that our operations must move values of

Reviewer: may be wrong but idk if arbitrary starting point is the correct word here I feel like
where $L$ is an arbitrary value representing the start of the interval.

maybe im tripping

Reviewer 2: replaced by phrasing it as any integer since that's more accurate than 'arbitrary starting point'

> 

Reviewer: Overall, in some sections you forgot to use latex.

Author: alr thanks!

Author: done btw

If all elements can be moved into some interval of length $d$, then it can be shown that all larger values of $d$ work. Hence, the condition is monotonic and we can binary search on $d$.

For a fixed $d$, we try to fit all elements into $[L, L + d]$, where $L$ is an arbitrary starting point for the interval:
- increase elements below $L$
- decrease elements above $L + d$

> The total cost (number of unit increments/decrements needed to move all elements into [L,L+d]) can be computed using prefix sums.

Reviewer: The total cost, the number of increments/decrements needed to translate all elements into an interval [L,L+d] can be computed using prefix sums.

### Choosing L

> We consider an interval [L, L + d] of fixed length d, where L is the left endpoint.

Reviewer: We consider an interval [L, L + d] of fixed length d, where L can be any number, and represents the left endpoint.

> If we move this interval slightly to the right without crossing any a[i], then:

Reviewer: If we move this interval to the right without crossing any a[i], then:

- elements left of L become more expensive to increase
- elements right of L + d become cheaper to decrease

> So we can always keep moving in the direction that does not increase cost until we hit some a[i].

Reviewer: By "hit some a[i]", I assume you mean that the right endpoint touches some a[i], but could you maybe clarify that.

So we can keep shifting the until the right or left endpoint hits some a[i]?? (Idk exactly what u mean)

Author: yeah thats exactly what i meant
